[TASK] Document all Extbase Validators (#5473)
TYPO3-Documentation/TYPO3CMS-Reference-CoreApi: Documentation/ExtensionArchitecture/Extbase/Reference/Validation/Validators/Index.rst

..  code-block:: php

    use TYPO3\CMS\Extbase\Annotation\Validate;

    class AddressForm
    {
        #[Validate([
            'validator' => 'RegularExpression',
            'options' => [
                'regularExpression' => '/^\d{5}$/',
                'message' => 'Bitte eine gültige Postleitzahl eingeben.'
            ]
        ])]
        public string $postalCode = '';
    }

..  _extbase-validator-regularexpression-use-cases:

Use cases
---------

-   Custom identifiers or slugs
-   Postal/ZIP code validation
-   Specific numeric or alphanumeric patterns

..  _extbase-validator-regularexpression-important:

Important
---------

Use this validator only for formats that are not supported by dedicated
validators. Prefer these built-in validators when applicable:

-   `EmailAddressValidator` – for email addresses
-   `DateTimeValidator` – for dates
-   `UrlValidator` – for URLs

These are easier to configure, localized by default, and more robust.

..  note::

    - This is a valid list inside a note.
    - Just make sure it's indented consistently.

..  _extbase-validator-stringlength:

StringLengthValidator
=====================

> The :php-short:`\TYPO3\CMS\Extbase\Validation\Validator\StringLengthValidator`
> validates the length of a string.
> 
> ..  code-block:: php

Author: ```suggestion
The :php-short:`\TYPO3\CMS\Extbase\Validation\Validator\StringLengthValidator`
validates the length of a string.

The check is also multi-byte save. For example "Ö" is counted as ONE charakter.

..  code-block:: php
```

:navigation-title: List of Validators

..  include:: /Includes.rst.txt
..  _extbase-validator:

=======================================

> Built-in Validators provided by Extbase

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Built-in validators provided by Extbase
```

=======================================

> This document lists all built-in Extbase validators available in TYPO3 13,

Reviewer: Better skip the version unless you want to update it with every major version. Or do we have a generated placeholder for this?

along with example usage for each using PHP attributes.

..  seealso::
    *   `Using validation for Extbase models and controllers <https://docs.typo3.org/permalink/t3coreapi:extbase-validation>`_
    *   `Custom Extbase validator implementation <https://docs.typo3.org/permalink/t3coreapi:extbase-domain-validator>`_

..  contents:: Validators in Extbase

> ..  _extbase-validator-alpanumeric:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
..  _extbase-validator-alphanumeric:
```

AlphanumericValidator
=====================

> Ensures a value contains only letters and numbers.

Reviewer 2: Good to know: It also contains hebrew, arabic and other countries letters, not just A-Z or a-z.

Author: Done

..  code-block:: php

    #[Validate(['validator' => 'Alphanumeric'])]
    protected string $username;

..  _extbase-validator-boolean:

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

BooleanValidator
================

Checks if a value matches a specific boolean value (`true` or `false`).

This validator is useful when you want to enforce that a property explicitly
evaluates to either `true` or `false`, such as for checkboxes in forms.

> By default, it does not enforce any specific value unless the `is` option is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, it accepts any boolean value unless the `is` option is
```

set.

**Options:**

> -   `is`: Accepts `'true'`, `'1'`, `'false'`, `'0'`, or `''`. Values are

Reviewer: Here actual `boolean` values are missing.

Author: Rephrased it to make  clear these are the strings that are interpreted explicitly

  converted internally to boolean `true` or `false`.

Ensure that a value is a boolean (no strict check, default behavior):

..  code-block:: php

    #[Validate(['validator' => 'Boolean'])]
    protected $isActive;

Require that a value must be `true` (e.g. checkbox must be checked):

..  code-block:: php

>     #[Validate(['validator' => 'Boolean', 'options' => ['is' => 'false']])]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    #[Validate(['validator' => 'Boolean', 'options' => ['is' => true]])]
```

Wrong value, also I'd suggest to use real booleans by default here. Numbers/strings are only supported for other contexts.

    protected bool $termsAccepted;

Require that a value must be `false`:

..  code-block:: php

>     #[Validate(['validator' => 'Boolean', 'options' => ['is' => 'false']])]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    #[Validate(['validator' => 'Boolean', 'options' => ['is' => false]])]
```

See above.

    protected bool $isBlocked;

..  _extbase-validator-collection:

CollectionValidator
===================

The `CollectionValidator` is a built-in Extbase validator for validating arrays
or collections, such as arrays of DTOs or `ObjectStorage<T>` elements.

> It allows you to apply validation rules to **each individual item** in a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It allows you to apply a single validation to **each individual item** in a
```

collection. The validation is recursive: every item is passed through the
validator you specify.

`elementValidator`
    The name or class of a validator that should be applied
    to each item in the collection (e.g. `'NotEmpty'`, `'EmailAddress'`).
`elementType`
    The class name of the collection's element type. All
    registered validators for that type will be applied to each item.

You must provide **either** `elementValidator` or `elementType`.

..  include:: _NoExamples.rst.txt

Use cases:

-   Validating dynamic or repeatable form fields (e.g. multiple answers)
-   Validating input arrays from multi-select fields or checkboxes
-   Validating each related object in an `ObjectStorage` property

..  note::
    Validation will be skipped if neither `elementValidator` nor
    `elementType` is set.

> 

Reviewer: Can we have a snippet here, too?

Author: `.. include:: _NoExamples.rst.txt`

So no unless you can provide one ;.)

if **at least one** of the nested validators succeeds.

**Behavior:**
-   All validators are evaluated in order.
-   Validation stops as soon as one validator passes.
-   If **all validators fail**, their errors are merged and returned.
-   If **any validator passes**, the result is considered valid.

**Use cases:**

Use this validator when a value is allowed to match **one of multiple conditions**.
For example:
-   A field can be either empty or a valid email
-   A string can be either a number or "N/A"
-   A value can match one of multiple formats

**Usage:**

This validator is typically used manually in custom validators or
in validator resolver configurations.

..  include:: _NoExamples.rst.txt

..  note::

    Extbase does **not** automatically construct disjunctions for you.
    You must manually create and configure a `DisjunctionValidator` when needed.

    It is not currently possible to use this validator directly via
    `#[Validate(...)]` annotations.

..  _extbase-validator-emailaddress:

EmailAddressValidator
=====================

The :php-short:`\TYPO3\CMS\Extbase\Validation\Validator\EmailAddressValidator`

> an email address using method :php:`\TYPO3\CMS\Core\Utility\GeneralUtility::validEmail()`.

Reviewer: We should link to the according `MAIL/validators` section in TYPO3_CONF_VARS here.

Author: done

..  code-block:: php

    #[Validate(['validator' => 'EmailAddress'])]
    protected string $email;

..  _extbase-validator-file-name:

FileNameValidator
=================

The :php-short:`TYPO3\CMS\Extbase\Validation\Validator\FileNameValidator`

> validates, that the given :php-short:`\TYPO3\CMS\Core\Http\UploadedFile`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
validates, that the given :php-short:`\TYPO3\CMS\Core\Http\UploadedFile` or
```

> :php-short:`\TYPO3\CMS\Extbase\Persistence\ObjectStorage` of `UploadedFile`

Reviewer 2: Two PHP files behind? Maybe ObjectStorage with contained objects of type UploadedFile?

Author: done

objects does not contain a PHP executable file by checking the given file
extension.

Internally the :php:`\TYPO3\CMS\Core\Resource\Security\FileNameValidator` is
used to validate the file name.

..  include:: _NoExamples.rst.txt

..  _extbase-validator-file-size:

FileSizeValidator
=================

The :php-short:`TYPO3\CMS\Extbase\Validation\Validator\FileSizeValidator`
validates, that the given :php-short:`\TYPO3\CMS\Core\Http\UploadedFile`
:php-short:`\TYPO3\CMS\Extbase\Persistence\ObjectStorage` of `UploadedFile`
objects do not exceed the file size configured via the options.

Options:

`minimum`

>     The minimum file size to accept

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The minimum file size to accept in bytes, accepts `K` / `M` / `G` suffixes
```

Here or as note.

`maximum`
    The maximum file size to accept

> Internally the :php:`\TYPO3\CMS\Core\Resource\Security\FileNameValidator` is
> used to validate the file name.

Author: ```suggestion
```

> used to validate the file name.

Reviewer: This paragraph is misplaced and should be dropped.

Author: Done

Internally :php:`\TYPO3\CMS\Core\Type\File\FileInfo` is used to determine the
size.

..  include:: _NoExamples.rst.txt

..  _extbase-validator-float:

FloatValidator
==============

> Checks if a value is a float.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Checks if a value is a floating point number.
```

..  code-block:: php

    #[Validate(['validator' => 'Float'])]
    protected float $price;

..  _extbase-validator-image-dimensions:

ImageDimensionsValidator
========================

The :php-short:`\TYPO3\CMS\Extbase\Validation\Validator\ImageDimensionsValidator`

> validate image dimensions of a given :php-short:`\TYPO3\CMS\Core\Http\UploadedFile`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
validates image dimensions of a given :php-short:`\TYPO3\CMS\Core\Http\UploadedFile` or
```

> :php-short:`\TYPO3\CMS\Extbase\Persistence\ObjectStorage` of `UploadedFile`

Reviewer 2: Same here

objects.

Options:

`width`
    The exact width of the image
`height`
    The exact height of the image
`minWidth`
    The minimum width of the image
`maxWidth`
    The maximum width of the image
`minHeight`
    The minimum height of the image
`maxHeight`
    The maximum height of the image

..  include:: _NoExamples.rst.txt

..  _extbase-validator-integer:

IntegerValidator
================

The :php-short:`\TYPO3\CMS\Extbase\Validation\Validator\IntegerValidator`
ensures that a value is an integer.

This validator is useful for validating numeric fields that must contain whole
numbers, such as quantities, IDs, or counters.

#[Validate(['validator' => 'Integer'])]
protected mixed $quantity;

..  code-block:: php

    #[Validate(['validator' => 'Integer'])]
    protected mixed $quantity;

..  _extbase-validator-mime-type:

MimeTypeValidator
=================

The :php-short:`\TYPO3\CMS\Extbase\Validation\Validator\MimeTypeValidator`

> validates mime types of a given :php-short:`\TYPO3\CMS\Core\Http\UploadedFile`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
validates MIME types of a given :php-short:`\TYPO3\CMS\Core\Http\UploadedFile` or
```

> :php-short:`\TYPO3\CMS\Extbase\Persistence\ObjectStorage` of `UploadedFile`

Reviewer 2: Same here

objects.

> Does also validate, if the given file extension matches allowed file extensions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Does also validate, if the extension of the validated file matches the allowed file extensions
```

> for the detected mime type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for the detected MIME type.
```

Options:

`allowedMimeTypes`

>     Allowed mime types (using */* IANA media types)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Allowed MIME types (using */* IANA media types)
```

`ignoreFileExtensionCheck`

>     If set to "true", the file extension check is disabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    If set to :php:`true`, the file extension check is disabled.
```

>     Be aware of security considerations when setting this to "true".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Be aware of security considerations when setting this to :php:`true`.
```

..  include:: _NoExamples.rst.txt

..  _extbase-validator-notempty:

NotEmptyValidator
=================

The :php-short:`\TYPO3\CMS\Extbase\Validation\Validator\NotEmptyValidator`

> ensures that a value is not considered empty.

Reviewer: Related to this we should note either once and prominently or for each validator that by default validators accept empty values, as in: validation is skipped.

Author: done

"Empty" in this context means:

-   An empty string (`''`)
-   `null`
-   An empty array (`[]`)

> 

Reviewer 2: And empty countable objects like \SplObjectStorage and of cause Extbase ObjectStorage
```php
if (is_object($value) && $value instanceof \Countable && $value->count() === 0) {
```

Author: Completed the list

This validator is commonly used to enforce required fields.

..  code-block:: php

    #[Validate(['validator' => 'NotEmpty'])]
    protected string $title;

..  _extbase-validator-numberrange:

NumberRangeValidator
====================

The :php-short:`\TYPO3\CMS\Extbase\Validation\Validator\NumberRangeValidator`
checks that a number falls within a specified numeric range.

This validator supports integers and floats and is useful for validating
percentages, prices, limits, or any numeric input with minimum and/or maximum
constraints.

..  _extbase-validator-numberrange-options:

> Validator options

Reviewer: The formatting for "Options" is different for some validators …

Author: Unified it

-----------------

-   `minimum` (int|float, optional):
    Lower boundary of the valid range (inclusive).

-   `maximum` (int|float, optional):
    Upper boundary of the valid range (inclusive).

-   `message` (string, optional):
    Custom error message or translation key for out-of-range values.

..  _extbase-validator-numberrange-example:

Example: Validate percentage
----------------------------

..  code-block:: php

    use TYPO3\CMS\Extbase\Annotation\Validate;

    class SettingsForm
    {
        #[Validate([

>             'validator' => 'NumberRange',

Reviewer 2: Nice: Multiline example

            'options' => ['minimum' => 1, 'maximum' => 100],
        ])]
        protected int $percentage;
    }

..  note::

    If only `minimum` is set, the validator checks for values **greater than
    or equal to** that minimum.

    If only `maximum` is set, it checks for values **less than or equal to**
    that maximum.

    You may use both together to define an inclusive range.

..  _extbase-validator-regularexpression:

RegularExpressionValidator
==========================

The :php-short:`\TYPO3\CMS\Extbase\Validation\Validator\RegularExpressionValidator`
checks whether a given value matches a specified regular expression (regex).
It is useful for validating custom string formats that are not covered by
built-in validators.

For example, it can enforce ID formats, postal codes, or other structured
inputs.

..  _extbase-validator-regularexpression-options:

Validator options
-----------------

-   `regularExpression` (string, required):
    The regular expression to validate against.

>     Must be a valid PCRE pattern, including delimiters (e.g. `/^...$/`).

Reviewer 2: "Including delimiters": Good point

                'regularExpression' => '/^[a-z0-9]+$/i'
            ]
        ])]
        public string $username = '';
    }

..  _extbase-validator-regularexpression-example-zip:

Example: ZIP code
-----------------

Validate a 5-digit postal code with a custom error message:

..  code-block:: php

    use TYPO3\CMS\Extbase\Annotation\Validate;

    class AddressForm
    {
        #[Validate([
            'validator' => 'RegularExpression',
            'options' => [
                'regularExpression' => '/^\d{5}$/',
                'message' => 'Bitte eine gültige Postleitzahl eingeben.'
            ]
        ])]
        public string $postalCode = '';
    }

..  _extbase-validator-regularexpression-use-cases:

Use cases
---------

-   Custom identifiers or slugs
-   Postal/ZIP code validation
-   Specific numeric or alphanumeric patterns

..  _extbase-validator-regularexpression-important:

Important
---------

Use this validator only for formats that are not supported by dedicated
validators. Prefer these built-in validators when applicable:

-   `EmailAddressValidator` – for email addresses
-   `DateTimeValidator` – for dates
-   `UrlValidator` – for URLs

> These are easier to configure, localized by default, and more robust.

Reviewer 2: Every other validator error message is much more readable: mimimi...you've entered a string which does not match the patter: /^tc34|r34qfh8tg|mkl(vdsvv)$$$f7wfhwesiJNK<great)/ WHAT?!!? ;-)

Author: Left a note

..  note::

    - This is a valid list inside a note.

>     - Just make sure it's indented consistently.

Reviewer: This should be dropped.

> 

Reviewer 2: ?!?!

Author: woopsie!

..  _extbase-validator-stringlength:

StringLengthValidator
=====================

The :php-short:`\TYPO3\CMS\Extbase\Validation\Validator\StringLengthValidator`
validates the length of a string.

..  code-block:: php

    #[Validate([
        'validator' => 'StringLength',
        'options' => ['minimum' => 5, 'maximum' => 50],
    ])]
    protected string $description;

> 

Reviewer: No options explanation?

Author: Done

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

..  _extbase-validator-string:

StringValidator
===============

The :php-short:`\TYPO3\CMS\Extbase\Validation\Validator\StringValidator`

> validates that a mixed variable is a string. Fails for array, numbers and bools.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
validates that a mixed variable is a string.
```

No need to mention what is not a string. ;-)

Author: This document is for integrators not only developers, also I think it is not that self-evident. In many contexts numbers and bools are treated like strings because they can be caseted to a string.

..  code-block:: php

    #[Validate(['validator' => 'String'])]
    protected mixed $comment;

..  _extbase-validator-text:

TextValidator
=============

> Checks if the given value is a valid text (contains no XML tags).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Checks if the given value is a valid text (contains no HTML/XML tags).
```

I know that this comes from the validator description but people are more likely to search for HTML instead of XML.

..  note::
    Be aware that the value of this check entirely depends on the output context.
    The validated text is not expected to be secure in every circumstance, if you
    want to be sure of that, use a customized regular expression or filter on output.

..  code-block:: php

    #[Validate(['validator' => 'Text'])]
    protected string $comment;

..  _extbase-validator-url:

UrlValidator
============

The :php-short:`\TYPO3\CMS\Extbase\Validation\Validator\UrlValidator` checks
whether a given string is a valid web URL.

It uses TYPO3’s internal utility method
:php-short:`\TYPO3\CMS\Core\Utility\GeneralUtility::isValidUrl()` to determine
whether the URL is valid.

Only well-formed URLs with a supported scheme such as `http://` or `https://`
will be accepted.

..  _extbase-validator-url-behavior:

Validation behavior
-------------------

-   Only string values are accepted.
-   The URL must include a valid scheme (e.g. `https://`).
-   Validation will fail for incomplete or malformed URLs.

> -   Non-HTTP(S) schemes (e.g. `mailto:`, `ftp:`, `tel:`) are not supported.

Reviewer 2: I can not find anything regarding that.
This method just works with `$urlParts['scheme']`, which can be nearly everything

-   The default error message key is:
    `LLL:EXT:extbase/.../locallang.xlf:validator.url.notvalid`

..  _extbase-validator-url-example-basic:

Example: Validate a web URL
---------------------------

This example ensures that a field contains a valid external website address.

..  code-block:: php

    use TYPO3\CMS\Extbase\Annotation\Validate;

    class UserProfile
    {
        #[Validate(['validator' => 'Url'])]
        protected string $website = '';
    }

..  _extbase-validator-url-use-cases:

Use cases
---------

-   Website or blog URLs
-   Social media profile links
-   User-submitted external links

..  note::

>     If you need to validate other URI schemes (e.g. `mailto:`, `ftp:`, `tel:`),

Reviewer 2: Ahh. God it. Yes, mailto: and tel: will not work. That's not a valid scheme. But ftp://, sftp:// or scp:// is a valid scheme. So please just remove ftp: from list

:navigation-title: List of Validators

..  include:: /Includes.rst.txt
..  _extbase-validator:

=======================================
Built-in validators provided by Extbase
=======================================

This document lists all built-in Extbase validators,
along with example usage for each using PHP attributes.

..  seealso::
    *   `Using validation for Extbase models and controllers <https://docs.typo3.org/permalink/t3coreapi:extbase-validation>`_
    *   `Custom Extbase validator implementation <https://docs.typo3.org/permalink/t3coreapi:extbase-domain-validator>`_

..  note::
    All validators except the `NotEmptyValidator <https://docs.typo3.org/permalink/t3coreapi:extbase-validator-notempty>`_
    accept empty values as valid. If empty values should not be possible,
    combine these validators with the `NotEmptyValidator`.

..  contents:: Validators in Extbase

..  _extbase-validator-alphanumeric:

> AlphanumericValidator

Reviewer: Shouldn't we use `:php-short:` for every validator on this page? Maybe not necessarily in the headline but at least by mentioning it once more by name in the first paragraph as done with various validators here already.

Author: Done

=====================

Checks that a value contains **only letters and numbers** — no spaces, symbols,
or special characters.

This includes letters from **many languages**, not just A–Z. For example,
letters from alphabets like **Hebrew, Arabic, Cyrillic**, and others are also
allowed.

This is useful for fields like usernames or codes where only plain text
characters are allowed.

If you want to allow any symbols (like `@`, `#`, `-`) or spaces, use the
`RegularExpressionValidator <https://docs.typo3.org/permalink/t3coreapi:extbase-validator-regularexpression>`_
instead.

..  code-block:: php

    #[Validate(['validator' => 'Alphanumeric'])]
    protected string $username;

..  _extbase-validator-boolean:

BooleanValidator
================

Checks if a value matches a specific boolean value (`true` or `false`).

This validator is useful when you want to enforce that a property explicitly
evaluates to either `true` or `false`, such as for checkboxes in forms.

By default, it accepts any boolean value unless the `is` option is
set.

Options:

> `is`

Reviewer: The main purpose of this option is not mentioned: requiring exactly the boolean value set by `is`.

Funny that Extbase does not have a basic `EqualValidator` which would cover this generally for all validators but that's how it is.

Author: Checks if a value matches a specific boolean value (`true` or `false`). sagt das meiner meinung nach aus?

Reviewer: Yup, sounds good. :-)

    Interprets strings `'true'`, `'1'`, `'false'`, `'0'`.
    Values of other types are converted to boolean directly.

..  note::
    Empty strings `''` and `null` always validate not matter the `is` option.
    If you want to disallow empty strings an `null` combine this validator with

>     the `NotEmptyValidator <https://docs.typo3.org/permalink/t3coreapi:extbase-validator-notempty>`_.

Reviewer: We either need this note everywhere except on `NotEmpty` or once at the top. Having it here only when the same applies to all of them does not make much sense.

Author: There is a message on top. However dealing with empty strings is expecially confusing in the Boolean Validators (empty strings are valid no matter if you set is to true or false) and the StringLength Validator (if minimum is higher then 0 empty strings still validate) therefore I added additional info boxes for those two cases.

`maxHeight`
    The maximum height of the image

..  include:: _NoExamples.rst.txt

..  _extbase-validator-integer:

IntegerValidator
================

The :php-short:`\TYPO3\CMS\Extbase\Validation\Validator\IntegerValidator`
ensures that a value is an integer.

This validator is useful for validating numeric fields that must contain whole
numbers, such as quantities, IDs, or counters.

#[Validate(['validator' => 'Integer'])]
protected mixed $quantity;

..  code-block:: php

    #[Validate(['validator' => 'Integer'])]
    protected mixed $quantity;

..  _extbase-validator-mime-type:

MimeTypeValidator
=================

The :php-short:`\TYPO3\CMS\Extbase\Validation\Validator\MimeTypeValidator`
validates MIME types of a given :php-short:`\TYPO3\CMS\Core\Http\UploadedFile` or
:php-short:`\TYPO3\CMS\Extbase\Persistence\ObjectStorage` with objects of type `UploadedFile`
objects.

Does also validate, if the extension of the validated file matches the allowed file extensions
for the detected MIME type.

Options:

`allowedMimeTypes`
    Allowed MIME types (using */* IANA media types)

`ignoreFileExtensionCheck`
    If set to :php:`true`, the file extension check is disabled.

>     Be aware of security considerations when setting this to :php:`true`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Be aware of security implications when setting this to :php:`true`.
```

This validator is useful when you want to enforce that a property explicitly
evaluates to either `true` or `false`, such as for checkboxes in forms.

By default, it accepts any boolean value unless the `is` option is
set.

Options:

`is`
    Interprets strings `'true'`, `'1'`, `'false'`, `'0'`.
    Values of other types are converted to boolean directly.

..  note::

>     Empty strings `''` and `null` always validate not matter the `is` option.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Empty strings `''` and `null` are always validated, regardless of the `is` option.
```

>     If you want to disallow empty strings an `null` combine this validator with

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    If you want to deny empty strings a `null`, combine this validator with
```
